(slow paced inspirational music)
A book that profoundly affected me several years ago
was "Confessions of an Economic Hit Man."
It was then that I began understanding how global finance
and political systems work, or actually don't work.
The author, John Perkins, has written
another book since then titled, "Hoodwinked."
"Hoodwinked" takes us through the folly of allowing
our world to be governed by corporations,
but also speaks to the solutions.
(slow paced inspirational music)
I'm so glad we had a chance to meet today.
We both had to come from other places
and your book has had, the first book,
which you're on the sixth anniversary
of "Confessions of an Economic Hit Man,"
just a few days past that, has had
such an incredible impact on people around the world.
And, we were talking off camera, so many people say
that was such a brave thing for you to do,
and I think that's what is really so enthralling
to all of us that haven't been in your position
is people in that position rarely come forward
and speak about it and give us an inside view.
So, you've had a lot of time to think about what happened
in the past but let's start with that
and what your life as an economic hit man entailed.
Well, you know, when I was an economic hit man,
I was traveling all over the world.
Basically, any country that had resources
that our corporations coveted, I or other economic hit men,
would visit and we'd end up arranging
a huge loan to that country from the World Bank
or one of its sister organizations.
But the money never actually went to the country,
instead it would go to our own corporations
to build infrastructure projects in that country,
power plants, industrial parks, highways, ports,
things that would benefit a few of the very wealthy families
in that country, as well as our corporations,
but not the majority of the people,
who were too poor to buy electricity
or drive cars on the highways or use ports,
and industrial parks don't hire many people.
And yet they would be left holding a massive debt
that they couldn't repay, so at some point,
we'd go back to the country and say,
hey since you can't pay your debts,
give us your resources real cheap, like oil.
Sell us your oil, real cheap, to our oil companies
without any environmental restrictions
or allow us to build a military base on your soil
or vote with us on the next critical United Nations vote.
And in the few cases when we fail,
and I talk in my books about how I fail with Jaime Roldós,
democratically elected President of Ecuador,
and Omar Torrijos of Panama,
wasn't able to corrupt these men.
They had too much integrity.
When that happens, then the jackals go in,
and they either overthrow governments
or assassinate their leaders, both Roldós and Torrijos
were assassinated because I couldn't bring them around.
This weighed heavily on you.
Weighed very heavily on me, and incidentally, recently,
we've seen something similar happen to Zelaya in Honduras,
President Zelaya who was overthrown,
and an attempt to overthrow President Correa of Ecuador,
that attempt failed, CIA attempted both cases.
In the few instances when we fail,
in the end the jackals also fail,
then the military goes in and that's
what happened with Saddam Hussein.
So were you first or second line,
are you the first one in to try to essentially
offer a deal they might not be able to refuse?
Yes, I'm the first in and the idea being
that very inexpensively we can take over a country
and its resources, we can basically bring it into our
secret empire simply by this way of manipulating finances
and economics and getting the country under our control.
The old system of conquering other lands is
very expensive, and very dangerous actually,
and so if you can do it this more subtle way,
the United States discovered back in the fifties,
that this was a much easier, safer, less expensive
way to take over other countries.
Devastating results, nonetheless of
course and now we're paying for it.
The implications of some of what's happening economically
in these times is very directly related to the times
you were doing some of what you were doing and
we'll get to that because economics is at the core of it.
I love your new book, "Hoodwinked," because you're really
getting to the core of systemic philosophies economically,
that have put us in real jeopardy
as not just the United States,
but has put the entire globe in jeopardy economically
and we're watching the dollar and the euro devalue
by the minute as we're sitting here as a matter of fact.
Let's talk about, do you want to do a little bit of
a background on Keynes versus Friedman
and what this means to us, why this is important,
why these names and these philosophies
on economics are so important today.
Well, perhaps the starting point would be to say that what
we've created is a failure, from an economics standpoint.
So the system we have in the world today,
where less than five percent of us live in the United States
and consume more than 25% of the world's resources,
and roughly half the world lives on the verge of starvation,
or actually starving, that's a failure, it's not a model.
You can't replicate this system in India or Africa
or Latin America, it's not a model, it's a failure.
We have to come up with something better.
And really the basis for that failure is when we switch from
Keynesian economics to Milton Friedman economics,
and that was happening in the '70s
when I was an economic hit man it was gradual,
but it really took off in 1980
when Ronald Reagan became President,
totally embraced Milton Friedman's form of economics,
at the same time, Margaret Thatcher of England,
Oddsson of Iceland, and many other
world leaders embraced Friedman,
and every President of the United States
has embraced Friedman ever since,
Democrat and Republican alike.
Can you give us a thumbnail sketch
of what the two different thoughts,
the two different philosophies are,
so we see what you're talking about here?
I don't want to make John Maynard Keynes
out to be some sort of an angel.
He wasn't, his form of capitalism could be,
in its own way, brutal, but it had
a great deal of compassion in it, too.
I grew up with that system when I was at business school,
which basically said that a corporation and its CEO
had a responsibility not just to stockholders
but to the consumers, to the employees of the company,
to the suppliers of the company,
and especially to the community where the company's located
and where it does its business, where it sells things.
This is a responsibility and the CEO
shouldn't make a heck of a lot of money.
It should get a good living out of this, well rewarded,
but not windfall profits, and that all changed.
When Milton Friedman's form of economics came into being,
the driving force behind it is the idea that
the only responsibility of business is to maximize profits,
regardless of the social and environmental cost.
Keynes didn't say that at all.
And a second premise of Friedman economics is that
businesses shouldn't be regulated
because regulations get in the way of making profits.
And third, everything should be run by business.
Everything should be privatized, the jails, the schools,
even the military, which we're now seeing in Afghanistan,
a privatization of the military.
So these three principles together, have created a situation
where we have a very unsustainable, unjust,
and unpeaceful world, it's really an insane world
that we've developed out of this.
This economic system, and I call it predatory economics.
And you also call it mutant capitalism.
Yeah, I think it's definitely a mutant form of capitalism.
Capitalism's been around for 400 plus or minus years,
and it's taken many different forms, it's a chameleon.
But this particular one, I think, is a real mutant,
in that it's ultimately self-destructive,
and it's totally unsustainable,
and it's making a lot of money
and giving a lot of power to a very small group of people,
very much like the old feudal systems of Europe did,
where you had the castle and everybody else
lived outside the castle and were very poor.
Yes, we're very much like that now.
It's even happening in the U.S. now.
And it was unsustainable in feudal Europe
and it's unsustainable now, it's gonna collapse.
It is collapsing, we're seeing it collapse,
and the only question is, is it going to collapse
in such a way that we're all terribly
devastated or can we make a transition?
And that's what we're going to talk about
is the potentials that can come out of this
and you know it's the timing is gonna be really the,
seems to me, the critical factor right now.
Do you mind if I read off page 128 of "Hoodwinked,"
we're talking about capitalism
and I thought this was wonderfully apropos.
You have a definition, what is capitalism.
Capitalism, economic system in which private individuals
and business firms carry on the production
and exchange of goods and services
through a complex network of prices and markets.
And as you say to the followup, this does not mean
that capitalists must plunder resources
or omit externalities from their accounting practices,
nor does it suggest that profit should be the sole motive,
or the lack of regulation as a requirement, and on and on.
That is what our current overlay, as you say,
Friedman economics has led us to.
And it might be interesting, another stat you talk about
is under Bush Jr., when he was President.
You say the net worth of the 400 wealthiest went
from one trillion to 1.6 trillion in that period of time.
That's a significant amount of money.
At the same time, the debt rose from five trillion
to 10 trillion, while the average worker income
went down $2,000, so just these little stats here
pretty much show what's going on.
There was a transfer of wealth somewhere
that we took on as debt that went
to those same few elite families.
And it's gotten worse, I just saw last week a report where
the wealthiest, I can't remember if it was one percent
or what it was, but the wealthiest small percentage point
in our country just increased their income by 500 times,
and that's while the rest of us
are going through a recession.
Well, I mean we read about these bonuses,
but it didn't hit me that it was to that extent.
Well you see, the robber barons
know how to take advantage of recessions.
So, the very people that
coerced a homeowner
to buy a $500,000 house when the homeowner
could really only afford a $300,000 house
ended up taking that house back, the bank,
for nothing, basically, foreclosed the guy who had the house,
walked away, foreclosed, the bank ended up owning it
and repackaging it and reselling it.
And when you do that and not just with houses,
but you do that with businesses,
you do that with everything across the economy,
you find yourself increasing your wealth phenomenally,
if you're in a position to do that.
You're in a position to increase your wealth by 500 times,
and it's a terrible system, and it's not leading to a world
that I care to bring my three-year-old grandson up in.
Every time I look at this young boy I think, my God,
what are we creating for his generation.
And you know for the first time in history,
I have to be aware, we all have to be aware
that the only way our children and grandchildren
can grow up in a sustainable, just, and peaceful world
is if every child, on every remote corner of this planet,
has that same opportunity and realizes it, and this is new.
This is a huge paradigm shift.
It's a huge shift, used to be that if we took care
of the United State or even our own state,
that's really all that was required,
and let the rest of the world go to hell.
But that's no longer the case.
We're so interrelated, integrated, interdependent,
that we've got to realize that the only way our kids
are going to survive in a decent world is if every kid
has that same decent world to survive in.
Let's go to two examples of this
because you write about them in the book and that is,
one of them has to do with Iran.
I mean we're looking at constant rumors.
We're on the verge of some kind of nuclear event
with Iran, or perhaps between Iran and Israel,
and yet this story started long ago,
if you wouldn't mind telling us that story,
post-World War Two, Kermit Roosevelt
and what actually happened and
how that has led to what's going on today.
Most people don't understand this.
Well in the early 1950s, Iran had a Premier who was
considered to be the model for democracy, in many respects.
He was Time magazine's Man of the Year in 1951,
Mohammed Mossadeg, and he was held up as this model,
and Iran had a great future, but Mossadeg had run
on a campaign promise that he would make sure
that if he became Premier, more of the profits
from the oil of Iran would go to the Iranian people,
not just to foreign oil companies.
And once he became Premier, he implemented policies
to ensure that that would happen.
And of course, the international
oil companies didn't like that very much,
so Eisenhower and the Dulles brothers, who were his
chief, head of CIA and also state department,
decided that they had to get rid of Mossadeg.
At that point, they didn't want to send in the military,
the common way to do it, because Iran was on the border
with Russia and in the early '50s, we were just really
in the heat of the Cold War, Russia had nuclear weapons,
we had nuclear weapons, Eisenhower was afraid
that it would trigger a nuclear war.
So instead, they sent in this CIA agent Kermit Roosevelt,
Teddy Roosevelt's grandson, and Kermit,
with a few million dollars, managed to start a rebellion.
He hired a bunch of thugs and they took to the streets.
It made it look like the people of Iran
were opposed to the Shah, which wasn't--
were opposed to Mossadeg, which, of course,
wasn't true at all, but he overthrew Mossadeg,
and replaced him with the Shah,
who we all know was a brutal dictator,
but a very good friend of oil and other
big U.S. corporations, and I worked for the Shah for some
years in the '70s, so I'm very familiar with that situation.
But here you had an opportunity, in the Middle East,
in Iran to actually foster democracy, and to support it.
We had that opportunity, we did exactly the opposite.
And had we gone in there and helped Mossadeg,
bringing his poorest of the poor of Iran
up by their bootstraps, using Iranian oil to do that,
I'm sure it would have changed
the whole profile of the Middle East.
We would never have the situation that we have today.
But we chose not to do it that way.
Not only that, but we were so successful, in CIA terms,
that this became the new model.
Instead of sending in the military,
let's send in Kermit Roosevelts.
The only problem was Roosevelt
was a card-carrying CIA agent.
Had he been discovered, it would've been very embarrassing
for the U.S. government, so the decision was made
very soon after that, not to use card-carrying agents,
but instead to use private contractors like me,
economic hit men who if we got caught doing
our dirty business, it didn't have to be
traced back to the government.
We didn't work for the government,
we worked for private corporations,
who, of course, were under government contract.
So, all we have to do is read headlines today
to find out what that has fostered
between U.S. and Iranian relations, for sure.
Well, today in Iran, I think what we're seeing is this,
Iran-ophobia, basically, this terrible distrust
and hatred of Iran and then it involves
the whole Muslim world, to a certain degree.
Carefully orchestrated by the media.
Very carefully orchestrated by the media.
And a large part of that fear, I believe,
is a knowledge that Iran has a legitimate role to play
in the Middle East, it always has.
It's a very powerful country with a lot of oil,
and a very clever country and in a way it defeated
Israel, to a certain degree, if you want to put it that way,
in Lebanon because Iran supports Hezbollah and Hamas,
both of them, and it's very subtle.
Iran, itself, didn't go in and do anything,
but it supported these groups that
have been quite successful in their own way.
It's a very subtle form of way.
But, the United States, in its determination
to have world control, sees countries like Iran
and China as huge threats because they are
the true opposition to us in quite a really legitimate way.
It's not necessarily military.
You have very well-educated
and highly-cultured individuals there--
With a lot of resources and the
knowledge of how to use the resources.
And think about it, if you're Iranian,
you're surrounded by nuclear weapons,
Russia has them, Israel has them,
Iraq now has them through us, India and Pakistan.
I mean you're surrounded by nuclear weapons,
and you're saying why shouldn't we have them.
I'm not advocating nuclear weapons.
I'd like to see all of them destroyed but if I'm an Iranian,
I'm gonna say what's the justice here.
It's a little bit like us telling the Lakota,
back in the 1800s when Custer was going out there,
you can't have guns, which we did,
we said guns are illegal on the reservation.
You can't have guns, we have the guns,
you're not allowed to have them.
Well that would pretty much upset you.
It would really upset me if somebody said that to me.
Absolutely, not a just situation.
No.
Okay, let's go to, there's a quote in here,
a man in debt is so far a slave,
and the same thing with a country in debt,
and as you said, part of your job was to make sure
that these countries were indebted to the United States
so that we could plunder their resources.
And let's talk about the relationship with Ecuador,
and what's happened historically with Ecuador,
right up till now, it's a very interesting country.
Well, Ecuador is a fascinating country from the standpoint
of its relationship to debt and us,
and a country I know very well.
That's where I was a Peace Corps volunteer.
I have three godchildren living in Ecuador.
I have a very strong connection, and Rafael Correa,
the current President of Ecuador, I count as a friend.
He gave me a great endorsement for my book,
and he has a PhD in economics
from the University of Illinois.
You can't really write him off as a radical Marxist.
He's not, he's a capitalist, and he says,
I don't see any reason why Capitalism can't be used
to help my poorest of the poor
pull themselves up by their bootstraps.
He says, I don't want foreign aid, I don't want U.S. aid.
We have tremendous resources in this country of Ecuador.
We're the third largest oil reserves in Latin America.
Let us use our oil reserves, let us use
our resources to pull our own people up.
Stop stealing our resources, stop plundering.
We're not gonna allow this to happen anymore.
So, he's pretty much on our bad boy list,
and the corporatocracy doesn't really
know how to deal with him though
because like I said, they can't pigeonhole him.
But one of the reasons that they're so disturbed by him is
he's refusing to pay three billion dollars worth of IMF debt
and he says, my people don't owe that debt.
It was signed off on by
brutal dictators back in the '70s.
And I know that to be true, I was there.
Cause you were there, you were part of it.
I know all that, and these dictators were put into power
by the CIA, and kept there by the CIA.
And they were extremely favorable to foreign oil companies.
They gave them incredible breaks including Texaco,
allowing Texaco to dump 16 billion gallons of toxic waste
into the Ecuadorian Amazon, 16 billion gallons.
BP in the Gulf of Mexico was 200 million, 16 billion.
This is what these dictators allowed.
The Ecuadorian people did not sign off on the loans
that these dictators took, and Correa's saying,
my people don't owe this money.
The dictators took it, they run away with it,
they live in Miami now, or Switzerland,
or wherever they live, go find them,
get them to pay off the money.
Or maybe the World Bank owes them money
because they fostered this whole thing.
Or maybe John Perkins and other
economic hit men owe this money.
Right (laughing).
He said the only thing I know is my people don't
owe the money, and they never got any benefits from it,
and I'm not paying, we're not paying.
So then what happened?
Well, you know, there was a big U.N. cry,
and we tried to put Correa down
and he stuck to his guns, and so
we launched a coup against him about a month ago or so.
He survived it, fortunately,
but it was a CIA-plotted coup.
There's no question about it, in fact,
the Ecuadorian military leader, who was the spearhead of it,
was trained at the School of the Americas
under the CIA auspices, but Correa is very clever,
and the people were very supportive of him,
and he survived the coup.
Of course, a year earlier, something similar had happened
in Honduras with democratically-elected President Zelaya,
who opposed Cargill, Kraft, Chiquita, Dole,
Russell Athletic, Nike, some of our big corporations.
He was trying to increase the minimum wage in Honduras,
and also reform, excuse me, revise the land reform laws,
to be in favor of the people rather
than foreign corporations, and he wouldn't be bribed
or turned around by economic hit men,
just like Correa wouldn't, and so we launched
a CIA coup against him, and that one was successful.
He was overthrown, he's now left the country.
And we're not, we're talking about such
gross injustice that he was standing up for.
In your book, you talk about how,
in some cases, you're talking about children
and people making six and a half cents an hour,
working abusively long days and 14 hour shifts.
I think part of that was, correct me if I'm wrong,
part of that had to do with Nike,
but they're not the only ones, this is
happening in other corporations, too.
These people are simply asking that their people have,
make a working wage instead of being exploited
to the extent that essentially it's worse than slaves,
slaves with no energy left to do anything but.
Not acceptable in a humanistic level.
No, to think that the American public is,
pretends to be blind to all this,
in many cases, is blind and we go out
and buy things that are made by child slaves, or any slaves.
Here, we teach in our schools we got rid of slavery,
during the Civil War, but we didn't.
There's a lot more slavery today than there ever was.
And we're supporting it by the way
we choose to spend our dollars.
Every one of us who buys anything
that's made by one of these companies is supporting it.
I go overboard not to buy anything made by Dole or Chiquita,
Nike, and let them know we must do that,
and we must let them know, send them emails
and tell them why we're not buying from them
because after all, in the long run, we do have control
over these corporations that are dependent
on us to buy their goods and services.
Yes, and that's a good part of the story
where we start taking back our own power.
Just briefly, going through the U.S.
and what's happened here as well,
talking about this outsourcing.
In 1950s, you say, a third of the U.S. population
was employed in factories and then,
it went down by 2002, it was 10%, rather than 33%,
and today it's even less than that
because we have factories of every kind
that have folded since 2002, so what are we looking at?
Maybe, maybe 3% of the population
left in manufacturing in the U.S.?
I don't know exactly what the percentage is
but it's very, very low, we don't make much here.
We don't make much here, and that is part of the solution,
again, and I want to start moving into them
because you really articulate what the problems are,
how the genesis of how we've gotten
into this situation we're in, and before we get into it,
one other thing I think is really critical,
and it's your, the way you hold the subject
of international terrorism, and you spoke about something
I thought was just so beautiful,
talking about the Somali pirates.
Would you just give a little synopsis of what you learned
in your conversation with one of them?
The Somali pirates are indicative
of this whole business of terrorism,
and I've met a lot of terrorists.
FARC members in Colombia and Somali pirates
and al-Qaeda members and they don't have
anything in common with each other, this is not an -ism.
An -ism implies that a common philosophy,
or common mode of operation.
Catholicism's an -ism, communism is an -ism,
terrorism today is not an -ism.
There are people all over the world
committing acts of terror, but they're not united.
And most of them don't share anything
in common except desperation.
So in Colombia, you've got poor peasants
who have been thrown off their land because of
big hydroelectric projects or oil, and they're desperate,
they don't know how to feed their kids.
In Somalia, you've got fishermen whose waters
have been fished clean illegally by foreign vessels
who did it openly, and Somali fishermen complained
to the U.N. for 20 years and never got justice.
And also, the big U.S. shipping lanes that go through there,
including nuclear waste from our base
in Diego Garcia, in the Indian Ocean.
And so, the fishing waters have been destroyed,
and these families don't know what to do now.
These men who are fishermen don't know what to do
except to turn to piracy, and unfortunately,
once people take on that route, they can't get out of it,
and it becomes there way of living.
So you do you have now with FARC in Colombia,
they've become extortionists, they've become kidnappers,
and the Somali pirates, it appears they're becoming
quite happy to be pirates in their own way,
although the ones I talked to say,
we hate being pirates, it's incredibly dangerous.
Fishing was dangerous enough, piracy's a lot more dangerous.
But the fact is, it's ingrained,
and once you've committed one act
like that you're a criminal, you can never go back.
And so you're stuck with it, and it's the shame
of the world today that we don't recognize
how these starving, desperate people are driven
to acts of terror and then become criminal forever,
and not only do we not recognize it,
but our military capitalizes upon it.
The corporatocracy capitalizes upon it to say,
well we've got to fight a global war on terrorism.
It's this united front, and bin Laden
and al-Qaeda's the spearhead of this huge front,
which is a bunch of BS, it's just not true.
But it's a very convenient way
to rally the Americans behind,
U.S. citizens behind a cause supposedly,
so we get rid of communism, now we've got to find
another -ism to fight in order to justify a military budget
that today, is over 60% of our discretionary budget,
all going to the military.
Criminal.
That is criminal.
Not only criminal
but it doesn't help anybody in the world, basically.
I mean we don't employ many people.
We don't employ many people and we go off to foreign lands,
and all this stuff we're making we're destroying
in those foreign lands, so we're making missiles
and tanks and so on, destroying them.
They're not really creating an economy,
and making people extremely angry at us.
So, it's coming down to action time,
on the part of every one of us,
and you had the,
I think the Dalai Lama would say
he had the privilege of sitting
next to you on an airplane one day.
He had read your book and someone saw you
and arranged a meeting while you were up in the air,
and the Dalai Lama, I love what you say here,
he said to you, meditation is good but that's not enough.
People have to take action.
Yes.
And that's where you start coming in
on the second part of your book, "Hoodwinked,"
and let's talk about some of the action we really,
truly do have the power to
spin into motion, as individuals.
Well, I think that's the key, is we have to understand
that we have to take the responsibility, as individuals.
And that the, what we're up against today,
is a geopolitical system that's run by big corporations.
That's the first understanding we have to come to.
It isn't about governments.
Several hundred years ago, geopolitics were run
by religious organizations basically,
and then it switched to governments,
and you had totalitarian governments,
and you had democratic governments, and everything
in between but the governments were in control.
And in a democracy or republic like the United States,
our elected officials wrote the laws.
But now we've moved into a new phase,
which is the corporations control it all,
whether it's in the totalitarian countries
or in the democratic countries.
It's the big corporations that call the shots.
So, we're seeing today in Washington,
elected officials are no longer writing the laws,
it's the lobbyists who write the laws,
and they work for the corporations.
They go through the hands of the elected officials,
but the elected officials are
beholden to the big corporations.
That's the word corporatocracy, that's what we're in.
Corporatocracy, right.
Yes.
And we've certainly seen that
with the Obama administration.
Here's a man who ran for President originally say,
I'm not taking any money from corporate America.
He took a lot of money form corporate America,
and he's now totally beholden to corporate America,
and we've seen that, and I'm not
trying to come down hard on Obama.
I realize he's very vulnerable.
He's got tremendous obstacles.
The point being that any President of the United States,
Republican, Democrat, whatever,
is under the thumb of corporations
because we've entered this new era where the corporations,
the corporatocracy, are the new emperors.
They are calling the shots around the world.
So, we need to look now where do we go from here.
So, we went from religion to government
to corporations, now, what's the next step?
It has to be we the people, but for it to be
we the people, we have to take control,
and we need to understand that the way
to take control is through the corporations.
We don't need to take to the streets with arms anymore,
as we did during the Vietnam War in high protest,
because that's against government, it's against militaries.
We need to take to the marketplace.
We need to create a new economy.
We need to support corporations and entrepreneurs
and individuals and local businesses
that are determined to create a new economy,
that moves out of the Milton Friedman definition,
that the only business of business is to maximize profits
regardless of social and environmental cost,
and into a new understanding that it's okay to make profit,
but only within the context of creating
a sustainable just and peaceful world.
We have to create a new playing field,
and we have to say that we're only going to buy
from those corporations that are committed
to creating a sustainable just and peaceful world,
to being good public servants, that a corporation
is not just about maximizing profit.
It's about being a good member of the community.
It's about being a public, it's about serving the public,
and they can make profits because that's
how you attract investors, but only within the context
of taking on social and environmentally responsible actions.
And what about the consumer themselves,
and like you say, the U.S. is five percent
of the population consumes 25% of the world's resources.
Isn't there an internal shift that has to take place
where we just simply have to stop
consuming more than we really need?
We don't consume what we need.
We're down to consuming what we want,
and even in the middle class it's
been that way for a very long time.
Cheap goods, I want it and it's gone.
You know, you're done with it, tired of it,
or it's falling apart within a month.
This terrible consumer psyche
that we have is destroying us.
It's destroying our planet and we need
to be very aware of that, and the United States,
less than 5% of the population of the world
consuming more than 25% of its resources.
One important understanding is that
a lot of that is going into the military.
And then a lot of the rest of it is going into junk,
things we really don't need, and things that are bad for us.
You know, Coca-Cola, soda pop,
most of the foods we eat are pretty bad for us.
So, how do we move beyond that?
And how do we move to an understanding that
a feudal system whereby five percent consume 25%
is just not feasible and we don't want it.
I don't want to be in that 5%, at all.
And to recognize that as we move into a new future,
we must address the very, very serious issue of poverty,
and this is a crux because the corporations, as I mentioned,
are based on this idea that you have to maximize profits,
regardless of environmental and social cost.
The second part of that idea is that
keep people impoverished because big corporations
benefit from poverty, and that's always been the case,
where feudal lords have always benefitted from poverty.
So, when people are impoverished,
you can take advantage of them in so many ways.
And of course, it's the big, big corporations, the Walmarts
and so forth, that can cut prices on everything,
and drive everybody else out of business,
if they don't go along with them,
and then sell to the poor because they have the lowest price
and they usually sell pretty cheap goods in general to them.
They exploit them in that way.
But we also exploit them in the labor force,
whether it's sweat shops in Indonesia,
or telephone answering services in Pakistan.
This tremendous exploitation of the poor,
so, we all need to know that in order to change
this paradigm, in order to create a new worldwide economy,
we all have to embrace what we call the poor,
the impoverished, and recognize that
they're truly brothers and sisters.
And most of us don't want to do that, you know.
We really don't want to go out
and touch lepers because we might get leprosy.
Well, we're getting leprosy, we've got it.
We've got a very, very sick leprosy-ridden--
Eating away at our culture, yes.
Planet and culture, and it is having a huge impact.
We need to understand the deep psychological
and emotional implications of that
as well as the materialistic implications.
And we need to develop, as you say in your book,
which I couldn't second more, and that is
a sense of internal passion in ourselves.
We've really lost that, that's given way
in much of the western world to
just either overwork, fear, or consumerism.
And passion is what's going to fuel
this internal shift within us to do something.
Do you care to talk about that for a bit?
Well, people often ask me, so what's the solution?
How do you answer a question like that?
There's so many solutions, and you
can kind of give general answers.
In my book, "Hoodwinked," I outline five areas
that all lead to the solution.
But, when you come right down to it,
the solution has to be highly personal.
We each have tremendous passion, and we each have talents,
and I don't know what your passions and talents are.
I know what mine are, I have a passion for writing,
and hopefully a talent in it, but everybody has passion
and talents, and the only way to really accomplish miracles,
that's what we're talking about here,
is to go into our passions and use our talents
to head towards those miracles.
And so, what I like to encourage everybody to do
is follow your individual passion,
if that's organizing
consumer-responsible
groups out on the street, if that's a consumer rebellions
against Nike or Monsanto or somebody, do that.
If your passion is teaching children
about how to relate to each other, follow that passion.
If your passion is helping Amazon rainforest,
then join Pachamama Alliance or
some other organization that's involved in that.
But, look to your passion, what is your passion?
And if we all really own up to our passions,
and use our talents in the best possible way,
but we all head for the same destination,
which is a sustainable just and peaceful world,
then we'll get there, and that's
the only way we'll get there.
We won't get there by thinking that when we elect
an Obama or a Palin or whoever the heck we elect,
they're gonna take us there because they're not.
We have to do it, and that's always been the case,
in democracy, when you come right down to it
or even non-democracies, that's always been the case
that the people have to make it happen.
On that note, thank you so much for your time, John.
I know you're giving a talk in just a little bit.
It's passion, and one thing, one other thing was you said,
we need new poster boys and girls here.
We can't afford to have Trumps, people like Donald Trump,
gracing cultural as an icon, a cultural icon gracing the
covers of anything as Man of the Year or anything else.
This is really, in terms of kind of
the brainwashing of the masses,
this has a very deep psychological impact
when you put up repeatedly for generation,
a whole generation now, the notion that
the people we should admire are those that have been able to
essentially exploit the most and garner the most
in terms of bottom-line and that's it, over.
That has to be finished, we need new faces like yours.
Yeah, well there's lots of good faces out there,
and we need to put them on the cover of our magazines.
Get Donald Trump out of there, get Jack Welch out of there,
and the media, what you people are doing,
a documentary like this, these things are changing the world
and I'm very hopeful cause I've seen a huge change
in consciousness in the last six years since "Confessions"
came out, especially in university campuses.
So, I'm very hopeful that we are turning things around,
and a lot of people will look at the last election,
and say, oh my God, you know, it's reversing.
But the fact of the matter is,
when you start to make progress,
the status quo digs in its heels real strong,
and to me that's always a great
sign that we're doing it right.
The fact that there's so much resistance,
for every action there's a reaction,
and the reaction is so strong right now that that
proves to you that the action itself is strong, too.
We are turning the tide, and we just need to keep going,
and we need to push harder and harder and harder,
and never give up and never say it's too tough.
Just say it's a challenge and that's what makes it fun.
Indeed, well thank you for your incredible
historical vision and for your honesty,
and also for the breadth of what
you share with us in this by way of solutions,
and I think it's a must-read for everybody.
"Hoodwinked" is a must-read, so thank you so much, John.
You're welcome, thank you.
Since his life as an economic hit man,
John Perkins has been dedicating his time
toward the restoration of the environments we've damaged,
as well as the restoration of democracy.
Many of these solutions are outlined in "Hoodwinked,"
which you can find at any major bookseller.
You may also want to read, "Confessions
of an Economic Hit Man," first as background.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(slow paced inspirational music)